packages/docs/core-concepts/state.md, before:

# State

<VueSchoolLink
  href="https://vueschool.io/lessons/access-state-from-a-pinia-store"
  title="Learn all about state in Pinia"
/>

The state is, most of the time, the central part of your store. People often start by defining the state that represents their app. In Pinia the state is defined as a function that returns the initial state. This allows Pinia to work in both Server and Client Side.

```js
import { defineStore } from 'pinia'

const useStore = defineStore('storeId', {
  // arrow function recommended for full type inference
  state: () => {
    return {
      // all these properties will have their type inferred automatically
      count: 0,
      name: 'Eduardo',
      isAdmin: true,
    }
  },
})
```

:::tip
If you are using Vue 2, the data you create in `state` follows the same rules as the `data` in a Vue instance, i.e. the state object must be plain and you need to call `Vue.set()` when **adding new** properties to it. **See also: [Vue#data](https://v2.vuejs.org/v2/api/#data)**.
:::

## TypeScript

You don't need to do much in order to make your state compatible with TS. Pinia will infer the type of your state automatically but there are a few cases where you should give it a hand with some casting:

```ts
const useStore = defineStore('storeId', {
  state: () => {
    return {
      // for initially empty lists
      userList: [] as UserInfo[],
      // for data that is not yet loaded
      user: null as UserInfo | null,
    }
  },
})

interface UserInfo {
  name: string
  age: number
}
```

If you prefer, you can define the state with an interface and type the return value of `state()`:

```ts
interface State {
  userList: UserInfo[]
  user: UserInfo | null
}

const useStore = defineStore('storeId', {
  state: (): State => {
    return {
      userList: [],
      user: null,
    }
  },
})

interface UserInfo {
  name: string
  age: number
}
```

## Accessing the `state`

By default, you can directly read and write to the state by accessing it through the `store` instance:

```js
const store = useStore()

store.count++
```

## Resetting the state

You can _reset_ the state to its initial value by calling the `$reset()` method on the store:

```js
const store = useStore()

store.$reset()
```

### Usage with the Options API

<VueSchoolLink
  href="https://vueschool.io/lessons/access-pinia-state-in-the-options-api"
  title="Access Pinia State via the Options API"
/>

For the following examples, you can assume the following store was created:

```js
// Example File Path:
// ./src/stores/counter.js

import { defineStore } from 'pinia'

const useCounterStore = defineStore('counter', {
  state: () => ({
    count: 0,
  }),
})
```

If you are not using the Composition API, and you are using `computed`, `methods`, ..., you can use the `mapState()` helper to map state properties as readonly computed properties:

```js
import { mapState } from 'pinia'
import { useCounterStore } from '../stores/counter'

export default {
  computed: {
    // gives access to this.count inside the component
    // same as reading from store.count
    ...mapState(useCounterStore, ['count'])
    // same as above but registers it as this.myOwnName
    ...mapState(useCounterStore, {
      myOwnName: 'count',
      // you can also write a function that gets access to the store
      double: store => store.count * 2,
      // it can have access to `this` but it won't be typed correctly...
      magicValue(store) {
        return store.someGetter + this.count + this.double
      },
    }),
  },
}
```

#### Modifiable state

If you want to be able to write to these state properties (e.g. if you have a form), you can use `mapWritableState()` instead. Note you cannot pass a function like with `mapState()`:

```js
import { mapWritableState } from 'pinia'
import { useCounterStore } from '../stores/counter'

export default {
  computed: {
    // gives access to this.count inside the component and allows setting it
    // this.count++
    // same as reading from store.count
    ...mapWritableState(useCounterStore, ['count'])
    // same as above but registers it as this.myOwnName
    ...mapWritableState(useCounterStore, {
      myOwnName: 'count',
    }),
  },
}
```

:::tip
You don't need `mapWritableState()` for collections like arrays unless you are replacing the whole array with `cartItems = []`, `mapState()` still allows you to call methods on your collections.
:::

## Mutating the state

<!-- TODO: disable this with `strictMode` -->

Apart from directly mutating the store with `store.count++`, you can also call the `$patch` method. It allows you to apply multiple changes at the same time with a partial `state` object:

```js
store.$patch({
  count: store.count + 1,
  age: 120,
  name: 'DIO',
})
```

However, some mutations are really hard or costly to apply with this syntax: any collection modification (e.g. pushing, removing, splicing an element from an array) requires you to create a new collection. Because of this, the `$patch` method also accepts a function to group this kind of mutations that are difficult to apply with a patch object:

```js
cartStore.$patch((state) => {
  state.items.push({ name: 'shoes', quantity: 1 })
  state.hasChanged = true
})
```

<!-- TODO: disable this with `strictMode`, `{ noDirectPatch: true }` -->

The main difference here is that `$patch()` allows you to group multiple changes into one single entry in the devtools. Note **both, direct changes to `state` and `$patch()` appear in the devtools** and can be time traveled (not yet in Vue 3).

## Replacing the `state`

You **cannot exactly replace** the state of a store as that would break reactivity. You can however _patch it_:

```js
// this doesn't actually replace `$state`
store.$state = { count: 24 }
// it internally calls `$patch()`:
store.$patch({ count: 24 })
```

You can also **set the initial state** of your whole application by changing the `state` of the `pinia` instance. This is used during [SSR for hydration](../ssr/#state-hydration).

```js
pinia.state.value = {}
```

## Subscribing to the state

You can watch the state and its changes through the `$subscribe()` method of a store, similar to Vuex's [subscribe method](https://vuex.vuejs.org/api/#subscribe). The advantage of using `$subscribe()` over a regular `watch()` is that _subscriptions_ will trigger only once after _patches_ (e.g. when using the function version from above).

```js
cartStore.$subscribe((mutation, state) => {
  // import { MutationType } from 'pinia'
  mutation.type // 'direct' | 'patch object' | 'patch function'
  // same as cartStore.$id
  mutation.storeId // 'cart'
  // only available with mutation.type === 'patch object'
  mutation.payload // patch object passed to cartStore.$patch()

  // persist the whole state to the local storage whenever it changes
  localStorage.setItem('cart', JSON.stringify(state))
})
```

By default, _state subscriptions_ are bound to the component where they are added (if the store is inside a component's `setup()`). Meaning, they will be automatically removed when the component is unmounted. If you want to keep them after the component is unmounted, pass `{ detached: true }` as the second argument to _detach_ the _state subscription_ from the current component:

```js
export default {
  setup() {
    const someStore = useSomeStore()

    // this subscription will be kept after the component is unmounted
    someStore.$subscribe(callback, { detached: true })

    // ...
  },
}
```

:::tip
You can watch the whole state on the `pinia` instance:

```js
watch(
  pinia.state,
  (state) => {
    // persist the whole state to the local storage whenever it changes
    localStorage.setItem('piniaState', JSON.stringify(state))
  },
  { deep: true }
)
```

:::

Commit message:

docs: note about strict in TS
Co-authored-by: Eduardo San Martin Morote <posva@users.noreply.github.com>

packages/docs/core-concepts/state.md, after:

# State

<VueSchoolLink
  href="https://vueschool.io/lessons/access-state-from-a-pinia-store"
  title="Learn all about state in Pinia"
/>

The state is, most of the time, the central part of your store. People often start by defining the state that represents their app. In Pinia the state is defined as a function that returns the initial state. This allows Pinia to work in both Server and Client Side.

```js
import { defineStore } from 'pinia'

const useStore = defineStore('storeId', {
  // arrow function recommended for full type inference
  state: () => {
    return {
      // all these properties will have their type inferred automatically
      count: 0,
      name: 'Eduardo',
      isAdmin: true,
    }
  },
})
```

:::tip
If you are using Vue 2, the data you create in `state` follows the same rules as the `data` in a Vue instance, i.e. the state object must be plain and you need to call `Vue.set()` when **adding new** properties to it. **See also: [Vue#data](https://v2.vuejs.org/v2/api/#data)**.
:::

## TypeScript

You don't need to do much in order to make your state compatible with TS: make sure [`strict`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig#strict), or at the very least, [`noImplicitThis`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig#noImplicitThis), are enabled and Pinia will infer the type of your state automatically! However, there are a few cases where you should give it a hand with some casting:

```ts
const useStore = defineStore('storeId', {
  state: () => {
    return {
      // for initially empty lists
      userList: [] as UserInfo[],
      // for data that is not yet loaded
      user: null as UserInfo | null,
    }
  },
})

interface UserInfo {
  name: string
  age: number
}
```

If you prefer, you can define the state with an interface and type the return value of `state()`:

```ts
interface State {
  userList: UserInfo[]
  user: UserInfo | null
}

const useStore = defineStore('storeId', {
  state: (): State => {
    return {
      userList: [],
      user: null,
    }
  },
})

interface UserInfo {
  name: string
  age: number
}
```

## Accessing the `state`

By default, you can directly read and write to the state by accessing it through the `store` instance:

```js
const store = useStore()

store.count++
```

## Resetting the state

You can _reset_ the state to its initial value by calling the `$reset()` method on the store:

```js
const store = useStore()

store.$reset()
```

### Usage with the Options API

<VueSchoolLink
  href="https://vueschool.io/lessons/access-pinia-state-in-the-options-api"
  title="Access Pinia State via the Options API"
/>

For the following examples, you can assume the following store was created:

```js
// Example File Path:
// ./src/stores/counter.js

import { defineStore } from 'pinia'

const useCounterStore = defineStore('counter', {
  state: () => ({
    count: 0,
  }),
})
```

If you are not using the Composition API, and you are using `computed`, `methods`, ..., you can use the `mapState()` helper to map state properties as readonly computed properties:

```js
import { mapState } from 'pinia'
import { useCounterStore } from '../stores/counter'

export default {
  computed: {
    // gives access to this.count inside the component
    // same as reading from store.count
    ...mapState(useCounterStore, ['count'])
    // same as above but registers it as this.myOwnName
    ...mapState(useCounterStore, {
      myOwnName: 'count',
      // you can also write a function that gets access to the store
      double: store => store.count * 2,
      // it can have access to `this` but it won't be typed correctly...
      magicValue(store) {
        return store.someGetter + this.count + this.double
      },
    }),
  },
}
```

#### Modifiable state

If you want to be able to write to these state properties (e.g. if you have a form), you can use `mapWritableState()` instead. Note you cannot pass a function like with `mapState()`:

```js
import { mapWritableState } from 'pinia'
import { useCounterStore } from '../stores/counter'

export default {
  computed: {
    // gives access to this.count inside the component and allows setting it
    // this.count++
    // same as reading from store.count
    ...mapWritableState(useCounterStore, ['count'])
    // same as above but registers it as this.myOwnName
    ...mapWritableState(useCounterStore, {
      myOwnName: 'count',
    }),
  },
}
```

:::tip
You don't need `mapWritableState()` for collections like arrays unless you are replacing the whole array with `cartItems = []`, `mapState()` still allows you to call methods on your collections.
:::

## Mutating the state

<!-- TODO: disable this with `strictMode` -->

Apart from directly mutating the store with `store.count++`, you can also call the `$patch` method. It allows you to apply multiple changes at the same time with a partial `state` object:

```js
store.$patch({
  count: store.count + 1,
  age: 120,
  name: 'DIO',
})
```

However, some mutations are really hard or costly to apply with this syntax: any collection modification (e.g. pushing, removing, splicing an element from an array) requires you to create a new collection. Because of this, the `$patch` method also accepts a function to group this kind of mutations that are difficult to apply with a patch object:

```js
cartStore.$patch((state) => {
  state.items.push({ name: 'shoes', quantity: 1 })
  state.hasChanged = true
})
```

<!-- TODO: disable this with `strictMode`, `{ noDirectPatch: true }` -->

The main difference here is that `$patch()` allows you to group multiple changes into one single entry in the devtools. Note **both, direct changes to `state` and `$patch()` appear in the devtools** and can be time traveled (not yet in Vue 3).

## Replacing the `state`

You **cannot exactly replace** the state of a store as that would break reactivity. You can however _patch it_:

```js
// this doesn't actually replace `$state`
store.$state = { count: 24 }
// it internally calls `$patch()`:
store.$patch({ count: 24 })
```

You can also **set the initial state** of your whole application by changing the `state` of the `pinia` instance. This is used during [SSR for hydration](../ssr/#state-hydration).

```js
pinia.state.value = {}
```

## Subscribing to the state

You can watch the state and its changes through the `$subscribe()` method of a store, similar to Vuex's [subscribe method](https://vuex.vuejs.org/api/#subscribe). The advantage of using `$subscribe()` over a regular `watch()` is that _subscriptions_ will trigger only once after _patches_ (e.g. when using the function version from above).

```js
cartStore.$subscribe((mutation, state) => {
  // import { MutationType } from 'pinia'
  mutation.type // 'direct' | 'patch object' | 'patch function'
  // same as cartStore.$id
  mutation.storeId // 'cart'
  // only available with mutation.type === 'patch object'
  mutation.payload // patch object passed to cartStore.$patch()

  // persist the whole state to the local storage whenever it changes
  localStorage.setItem('cart', JSON.stringify(state))
})
```

By default, _state subscriptions_ are bound to the component where they are added (if the store is inside a component's `setup()`). Meaning, they will be automatically removed when the component is unmounted. If you want to keep them after the component is unmounted, pass `{ detached: true }` as the second argument to _detach_ the _state subscription_ from the current component:

```js
export default {
  setup() {
    const someStore = useSomeStore()

    // this subscription will be kept after the component is unmounted
    someStore.$subscribe(callback, { detached: true })

    // ...
  },
}
```

:::tip
You can watch the whole state on the `pinia` instance:

```js
watch(
  pinia.state,
  (state) => {
    // persist the whole state to the local storage whenever it changes
    localStorage.setItem('piniaState', JSON.stringify(state))
  },
  { deep: true }
)
```

:::
